diff, wdiff, git
----------------

If you're the sort of person who took a few detours into the history of
religion in college, you might be familiar with some of the ways people used to
do textual comparison.  When pen, paper, and typesetting were what scholars
had to work with, they did some amazingly sophisticated things in order to
expose the relationships between multiple pieces of text.

{slide: some textual criticism tools}

Here's a book I got in college.  _Gospel Parallels: A Comparison of the
Synoptic Gospels_, by Burton H. Throckmorton, Jr.  It breaks up three books
from the Bible by the stories and themes that they contain, and shows the
overlapping sections of each book that contain parallel texts.  You can work
your way through and see what parts only show up in one book, or in two but not
the other, or in all three.  These kinds of tools support all sorts of
theoretical stuff about which books copied each other and how, and what other
sources they might have copied that we've since lost.

This is some _incredibly_ dry material, even if you kind of dig thinking about
questions like how and when an important religious book was written and
compiled.  It takes a special temperament to actually sit poring over
fragmentary texts in ancient languages and do these painstaking comparisons.
Even if you're a writer or editor and work with a lot of revisions of a text,
there's a good chance you rarely do this kind of comparison on your own work,
because that shit is _tedious_.

And yet it turns out that academics aren't the only people who need tools for
comparing different versions of a text.  Programmers, in fact, need to do this
_constantly_.  Programmers are also happiest when putting off the _actual_ task
at hand to solve some incidental problem that cropped up along the way, so by
now there are a lot of ways to say "here's how this file is different from this
file", or "here's how this file is different from itself a year ago".  It turns
out that these work just about as well for English text as they do for code.

{demo various diff tools, source control}
