7. the internet for humans, and how the command line can help
=============================================================

Web browsers are really complicated these days.  They're full of rendering
engines, audio and video players, programming languages, development tools,
databases -- you name it, and there's a fair chance it's in there somewhere.
The modern web browser is kitchen sink software, and to make matters worse, it
is _totally surrounded_ by technobabble.  It can take _years_ to come to terms
with the ocean of words about web stuff and sort out the meaningful ones from
the snake oil and bureaucratic mysticism.

All of which can make the web itself seem like a really complicated landscape,
and obscure the simplicity of its basic design, which is this:

Some programs pass text around to one another.

It's more complicated than that, of course, but the gist of it is that the web
is made out of URLs, "Uniform Resource Locators", which are paths to things.
If you squint, these look kind of like paths to files on your filesystem.  When
you visit a URL in your browser, it asks a server for a certain path, and the
server gives it back some text.  When you click a button to submit a form,
your browser sends some text to the server and waits to see what it says back.

reading the web
---------------

Let's illustrate this.  I've written a really simple web page that lives at
[`http://p1k3.com/hello_world.html`](http://p1k3.com/hello_world.html).

    $ curl 'http://p1k3.com/hello_world.html'
    <html>
      <head>
        <title>hello, world</title>
      </head>
    
      <body>
        <h1>hi everybody</h1>
    
        <p>How are things?</p>
      </body>
    </html>

`curl` is a program with lots and lots of features -- it too is a little bit of
a kitchen sink -- but it has one core purpose, which is to grab things from
URLs and spit them back out.  It's a little bit like `cat` for things on the
web.  Try the above command with just about any URL you can think of, and
you'll probably get _something_ back.  Let's try this book:

    $ curl 'http://p1k3.com/userland-book/' | head
    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html lang=en>
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8">
      <title>userland: a book about the command line for humans</title>
      <link rel=stylesheet href="userland.css" />
      <script src="js/jquery.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    </head>
    
    <body>

`hello_world.html` and `p1k3.com/userland-book` are both **H**yper**T**ext
**M**arkup **L**anguage.  HTML has been around for quite a while now, and it's
undergone a huge amount of politicking and overengineering, but at heart it
still looks a lot [like it did in
1991](http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html).

The basic idea is that the contents of a web page are marked up with tags.
A tag looks like this:

    <title>hi!</title> -,
     |     |            |
     |     `- content   |
     |                  `- closing tag
     `-opening tag

Most HTML these days is generated by software that pulls stuff out of databases
and stitches it together into something your browser will recognize, but it's
still entirely possible to write simple HTML documents in your text editor of
choice, and tools that work with text can operate on HTML documents.

While the browser you use day-to-day is (probably) a graphical interface which
does all sorts of things impossible to render in a terminal, some of the
earliest web browsers were entirely text-based, and options still exist.  Lynx,
which originated at the University of Kansas in the early 1990s, still works:

    $ lynx -dump 'http://p1k3.com/userland-book/' | head
                                        userland
         __________________________________________________________________
    
                     [1]# a book about the command line for humans
    
       Late last year, [2]a side trip into text utilities got me thinking
       about how much my writing habits depend on the Linux command line. This
       struck me as a good hook for talking about the tools I use every day
       with an audience of mixed technical background.
    

Another option is w3m, which copes a little more gracefully with some of
the complexities of modern web layout.

    $ w3m -dump 'http://p1k3.com/userland-book/' | head
    userland
    
    ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
    
    # a book about the command line for humans
    
    Late last year, a side trip into text utilities got me thinking about how much
    my writing habits depend on the Linux command line. This struck me as a good
    hook for talking about the tools I use every day with an audience of mixed
    technical background.

writing the web
---------------

{to come}
